feat: Annotation docs (#3106)
chanzuckerberg/single-cell-data-portal: frontend/doc-site/04__Analyze Public Data/4_4__Annotate.mdx

# Automated Annotation of Single Cell Data (EXPERIMENTAL)

> CZ CELLxGENE Annotate enables label transfer and reference mapping from expertly curated reference atlases to your newly generated and QC'd single cell datasets. Your data can be annotated using CELLxGENE Desktop along with any of our available label transfer and reference mapping models. When you run a CELLxGENE annotation model, your dataset will contain the following new information:

Reviewer: This sentence is good if the audience is a computational biologist. If you're targeting an experimental biologist you may want to lead with a sentence that uses simpler language. Then, if it's necessary, explain that it achieves prediction through label transfer and reference mapping.

> CZ CELLxGENE Annotate enables label transfer and reference mapping from expertly curated reference atlases to your newly generated and QC'd single cell datasets. Your data can be annotated using CELLxGENE Desktop along with any of our available label transfer and reference mapping models. When you run a CELLxGENE annotation model, your dataset will contain the following new information:

Author: yes, will simplify

> CZ CELLxGENE Annotate enables label transfer and reference mapping from expertly curated reference atlases to your newly generated and QC'd single cell datasets. Your data can be annotated using CELLxGENE Desktop along with any of our available label transfer and reference mapping models. When you run a CELLxGENE annotation model, your dataset will contain the following new information:

Author: Will adjust this for production docs release

> CZ CELLxGENE Annotate enables label transfer and reference mapping from expertly curated reference atlases to your newly generated and QC'd single cell datasets. Your data can be annotated using CELLxGENE Desktop along with any of our available label transfer and reference mapping models. When you run a CELLxGENE annotation model, your dataset will contain the following new information:

Author: adjusted to assume less knowledge of mapping algo's, resolving the discussion

- performing differential expression
- refining cell type labels by creating custom annotations

**Disclaimer:** The Annotation feature in CELLxGENE is new and experimental. We intend for the results generated by the workflow to be a starting point for annotating your single cell dataset. If you run into issues completing this workflow, we would love to hear about your experience. Feel free to reach out to [cellxgene@chanzuckerberg.com](cellxgene@chanzuckerberg.com) to get help running the workflow or to forward constructive feedback. In the meantime, in order to obtain the best results, we make the following recommendations:
- use this predictive annotation workflow with data generated by 10X platforms
- use the tissue model which is most closely related to the tissue profiled in your single cell experiment

## Installation of CELLxGENE[annotate]

You can install the latest experimental release of CELLxGENE to gain access to the automatic annotation subcommand. It is highly recommended to perform installation in a clean virtual environment (such as conda or venv) with python version 3.8+. Find examples of virtual environment setup using venv and conda below

### venv setup

```

> brew install pyenv  # used by MLflow

Author: Added this link before the code section starts

virtualenv --python python3.8 /path/to/venv

. /path/to/venv/bin/activate

```

### conda setup

```
conda create -n cellxgene 'python=3.8'

conda activate cellxgene
```

### pip install
Once your virtual environment is installed and activated, install the `annotate` feature using pip using the following command:

`pip install cellxgene[annotate]`

> you may also install from our test PyPi release:

Author: Removed this

`pip install --no-cache-dir --index-url https://test.pypi.org/simple/ --extra-index-url https://pypi.org/simple 'cellxgene[annotate]==1.1.0.dev4'`

You can run the following to test the success of your installation:

`cellxgene annotate -h` or `cellxgene annotate --help`

## CELLxGENE Annotation Workflow

See our quickstart guide to  quickly see if you can run through the pipeline or check out the more detailed sections below for more detailed descriptions of the workflow. Both assume that you have properly set up a clean virtual environment to work from.

### Quickstart

Depending on your environment manager, execute one of the following quickstart commands:

#### venv
```

> mkdir annotations #create a directory to download data, run annotation pipeline and store annotated object

Author: addressed

cd annotations #navigate to newly created directory

> wget https://github.com/chanzuckerberg/cellxgene/raw/main/example-dataset/pbmc3k.h5ad # retrieve sample dataset

Reviewer: nit: suggest `curl` over `wget` since `curl` ships with more base packages. wget needs to be brew installed, iirc.

Author: will address this for the production release, but will give to pre-alpha group with wget commands

Author: addressed this feedback, thank you for the suggestion, resolving the thread

cellxgene annotate -i pbmc3k.h5ad  -m https://s3.console.aws.amazon.com/s3/object/cellxgene-annotation-public?region=us-west-2&prefix=cell_type/models/immune_ref_20220728145305_venv.zip -o pbmc3kannotated.h5ad # generate annotations

cellxgene launch pbmc3kannotated.h5ad #launch cellxgene explorer
```

#### conda

```
mkdir annotations #create a directory to download data, run annotation pipeline and store annotated object

cd annotations #navigate to newly created directory

wget https://github.com/chanzuckerberg/cellxgene/raw/main/example-dataset/pbmc3k.h5ad # retrieve sample dataset

> cellxgene annotate -i pbmc3k.h5ad  -m https://cellxgene-annotation-public.s3.us-west-2.amazonaws.com/cell_type/models/immune_ref_20220728145305_conda.zip -o pbmc3kannotated.h5ad # generate annotations

Reviewer: this command does not run on ubuntu - it throws an error: 
```python3
acarr@acarr-ThinkPad-X1-Carbon-Gen-9:~$ cellxgene annotate -i pbmc3k.h5ad -m https://s3.console.aws.amazon.com/s3/object/cellxgene-annotation-public?region=us-west-2&prefix=cell_type/models/immune_ref_20220728145305_venv.zip --output-h5ad-file pbmc3kannotated.h5ad
[1] 66685
--output-h5ad-file: command not found
```

Swapping h5ad earlier fixes it, but it then errors out due to dependencies. Not sure if the dependencies is user error or not. Will investigate if time permits.

Author: Thanks Ambrose - the commands have been updated to address this issue - marking this as resolved for now

[10X cellranger](https://support.10xgenomics.com/single-cell-gene-expression/software/pipelines/latest/using/tutorial_ov) is one of the standard pipelines for quantifying gene expression values (generating the count matrix). While the `annotate` subcommand does not currently offer the ability to read cellranger outputs directly, it is relatively easy to create a compatible `anndata` object using `scanpy`. Here are some resources to get you started:

- [ScanPy PBMC 3K clustering tutorial](https://scanpy-tutorials.readthedocs.io/en/latest/pbmc3k.html)
- [scanpy.read_10x_mtx()](https://scanpy.readthedocs.io/en/stable/generated/scanpy.read_10x_mtx.html)
- [scanpy.read_10x_h5()](https://scanpy.readthedocs.io/en/stable/generated/scanpy.read_10x_h5.html)

It is important that once you have constructed your object, that you perform initial QC filtering of low quality cells from the dataset. See this [link](https://scanpy-tutorials.readthedocs.io/en/latest/pbmc3k.html) for more details (specifically, the section entitled 'Basic Filtering').

#### Prediction model
You can download models to perform prediction for the following tissues:

> - [TODO: lung](www.google.com)

Reviewer: fix todos

Author: fixed

> - [TODO: immune](www.google.com)

Reviewer: fix todos

Author: fixed

> # Automated Annotation of Single Cell Data (EXPERIMENTAL)

Reviewer 2: In terms of doc site organization, I'm wondering if this should go into [section 5](https://github.com/chanzuckerberg/single-cell-data-portal/blob/main/frontend/doc-site/05__Annotate%20and%20Analyze%20Your%20Data/5_4__Annotating%20Data.mdx), which covers CELLxGENE Annotate (aka desktop)?

Also, if we move if there, readers might have trouble differentiating with the [Annotating Data](https://github.com/chanzuckerberg/single-cell-data-portal/blob/main/frontend/doc-site/05__Annotate%20and%20Analyze%20Your%20Data/5_4__Annotating%20Data.mdx) page. The title here definitely states "Automated Annotation", which is good, but maybe we need to change the _other_ page to explicitly state "Manual Annotation". Not really sure what's best, but want to call this out.

Author: Yes definitely, this doc was mistakenly created in this section - that move can be after all the current feedback has been solicited (otherwise, I'm guessing it messes with the diff).

Thanks for the callout @atolopko-czi, I think your suggestion is good - tagging @ambrosejcarr to see if he has any thoughts/opinions on the subject.

- visualizing clusters by predicted cell type
- plotting marker genes
- performing differential expression
- refining cell type labels by creating custom annotations

**Disclaimer:** The Annotation feature in CELLxGENE is new and experimental. We intend for the results generated by the workflow to be a starting point for annotating your single cell dataset. If you run into issues completing this workflow, we would love to hear about your experience. Feel free to reach out to [cellxgene@chanzuckerberg.com](cellxgene@chanzuckerberg.com) to get help running the workflow or to forward constructive feedback. In the meantime, in order to obtain the best results, we make the following recommendations:
- use this predictive annotation workflow with data generated by 10X platforms
- use the tissue model which is most closely related to the tissue profiled in your single cell experiment (currently available models are: lung, pan-tissue immune)

## Installation of CELLxGENE[annotate]

> You can install the latest experimental release of CELLxGENE to gain access to the automatic annotation subcommand. It is highly recommended to perform installation in a clean virtual environment (such as conda or venv) with python version 3.9+. Find examples of virtual environment setup using venv and conda below

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can install the latest experimental release of CELLxGENE Annotate to gain access to the automatic annotation subcommand. It is highly recommended to perform installation in a clean virtual environment using [Conda](https://docs.conda.io/en/latest/) or [venv](https://docs.python.org/3/library/venv.html) with Python version 3.9+. Find examples of virtual environment setup using venv and conda below.
```

> You can install the latest experimental release of CELLxGENE Annotate to gain access to the automatic annotation subcommand. It is highly recommended to perform installation in a clean virtual environment using [Conda](https://docs.conda.io/en/latest/) or [venv](https://docs.python.org/3/library/venv.html) with Python version 3.9+. Find examples of virtual environment setup using venv and conda below.

Reviewer 2: actually, I see you already have other links below for venv and conda (anaconda).  Maybe make consistent? The below links are better.

Author: Do you think it is ok to keep the links in both places? I can swap out the link with ones you think are better

Reviewer 2: 👍 for links in one location

Author: I did a bit of a hybrid change here. I kept the links you put underneath the installation section (because they both provide overviews) and kept the link to the anaconda installer in the conda specific section - lmk if you think that is confusing or adds unnecessary maintenance cost

> You can install the latest experimental release of CELLxGENE Annotate to gain access to the automatic annotation subcommand. It is highly recommended to perform installation in a clean virtual environment using [Conda](https://docs.conda.io/en/latest/) or [venv](https://docs.python.org/3/library/venv.html) with Python version 3.9+. Find examples of virtual environment setup using venv and conda below.

Author: Yes - good call!

> You can install the latest experimental release of CELLxGENE Annotate to gain access to the automatic annotation subcommand. It is highly recommended to perform installation in a clean virtual environment using [Conda](https://docs.conda.io/en/latest/) or [venv](https://docs.python.org/3/library/venv.html) with Python version 3.9+. Find examples of virtual environment setup using venv and conda below.

Author: Made changes to communicate this:

https://github.com/chanzuckerberg/single-cell-data-portal/blob/feat-annotation-docs/frontend/doc-site/04__Analyze%20Public%20Data/4_4__Annotate.mdx#venv-setup

https://github.com/chanzuckerberg/single-cell-data-portal/blob/feat-annotation-docs/frontend/doc-site/04__Analyze%20Public%20Data/4_4__Annotate.mdx#conda-setup

### venv setup

> For an overview of `venv`, refer [here](https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/venv.html), for installation guidance refer [here](https://github.com/pyenv/pyenv#installation)

Reviewer 2: I think we can remove the "installation guidance" part, since `venv` is a module that is installed along with Python (i.e. nothing more to install).  `pyenv`, confusingly, is a tool to manage multiple Python versions.

Author: oh wow, didn't realize that - that's not great guidance - agreed on the change!

Author: I removed the 'installation guidance' part and replaced the text with this:

'For an overview of venv, refer to the link in the above section. If you are on an apple silicon machine (i.e mac with M1/M2 processor), you must use conda as an environment manager (refer to the section directly below).'

cellxgene launch minilungAnnotated.h5ad  # launch cellxgene explorer
```

#### conda

```
mkdir annotations  # create a directory to download data, run annotation pipeline and store annotated object

cd annotations  # navigate to newly created directory

wget https://cellxgene-annotation-public.s3.us-west-2.amazonaws.com/cell_type/tutorial/minilung.h5ad  # retrieve sample dataset

cellxgene annotate -i minilung.h5ad  -m https://cellxgene-annotation-public.s3.us-west-2.amazonaws.com/cell_type/models/hlca_20220728144320_conda.zip -o minilungAnnotated.h5ad --mlflow-env-manager conda --no-use-gpu --gene-column-name feature_name  # generate annotations

cellxgene launch minilungAnnotated.h5ad #launch cellxgene explorer
```

By default, you can find annotations in the `obs` dataframe underneath the names: `cxg_cell_type_predicted` for cell type labels and `cxg_cell_type_predicted_uncertainty` for corresponding uncertainty scores.

> You can find an already version of the LungMap subset [here](https://cellxgene-annotation-public.s3.us-west-2.amazonaws.com/cell_type/tutorial/minilung_cxg_annotated.h5ad).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can find an already annotated version of the LungMap subset [here](https://cellxgene-annotation-public.s3.us-west-2.amazonaws.com/cell_type/tutorial/minilung_cxg_annotated.h5ad).
```

Author: thanks for catching this!

- trigger a one-time download of the model, stored locally for repeated use (in .model_cache by default)
- take some extra time to setup an (internal) python env in which to run the model

Once your call to `cellxgene annotate` completes, you will have the following new information in your `anndata` object:

- transferred annotations/labels [`categorical`] (i.e. cell type) - these will be stored under `adata.obs['cxg_cell_type_predicted']` by default
- confidence scores [`numeric`] - stored under `adata.obs['cxg_cell_type_predicted_uncertainty']` by default
- a mapping into the reference embedding space - stored under `adata.obsm['cxg_cell_type'], by default`
- a UMAP layout for the query data in this reference embedding space - stored under `adata.obsm['cxg_cell_type_umap']` by default
- metadata about the model used - stored under `adata.uns['cxg_cell_type_predictions']['model_url']` by default

The `cellxgene annotate` subcommand offers a number of options to customize how the workflow is run and to adapt to different scenarios. You can display the full list of available options like so:

`cellxgene annotate -h`

### Step 2: Explore and Refine

> After you have successfully completed the annotation workflow, you are now ready to explore your results in CELLxGENE Desktop!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After you have successfully completed the annotation workflow, you are now ready to explore your results in CELLxGENE Annotate!
```

Author: Wondering if we should keep it as desktop since we are still using the desktop explorer to view the data/annotations?

Reviewer 2: I thought the rebranding renamed "cellxgene desktop" to "CZ CELLxGENE Annotate"

Author: You are right - my understanding was not up-to-date, I'll commit all of these relevant changes that you have suggested here - thanks!

> You can launch your annotated `anndata` object in the CELLxGENE explorer like so:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can launch your annotated `anndata` object in the CELLxGENE Annotate like so:
```

Author: same comment as above

> Wondering if we should keep it as desktop since we are still using the desktop explorer to view the data/annotations?

`cellxgene launch ./pathTo/annotatedData.h5ad`

> You will now have access to the standard set of CELLxGENE features to explore your single cell dataset. Here are some initial steps that you might take to start exploring your annotated dataset:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You will now have access to the standard set of CELLxGENE Annotate features to explore your single cell dataset. Here are some initial steps that you might take to start exploring your annotated dataset:
```
too confusing? want to be able to say "...to explore...and edit..."

Author: same comment as above

> Wondering if we should keep it as desktop since we are still using the desktop explorer to view the data/annotations?

- use this predictive annotation workflow with data generated by 10X platforms
- use the tissue model which is most closely related to the tissue profiled in your single cell experiment (currently available models are: lung, pan-tissue immune)

## Installation of CELLxGENE[annotate] (OS X)

You can install the latest experimental release of CELLxGENE Annotate to gain access to the automatic annotation subcommand. It is highly recommended to perform installation in a clean virtual environment using [Conda](https://docs.conda.io/en/latest/) or [venv](https://docs.python.org/3/library/venv.html) with Python version 3.9+. Find examples of virtual environment setup using venv and conda below.

CELLxGENE[annotate] is currently only supported on OS X.

### venv setup

For an overview of `venv`, refer [here](https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/venv.html), for installation guidance refer [here](https://github.com/pyenv/pyenv#installation)

```
brew install pyenv  # used by MLflow

> python3 -m venv ./.cxg_annotate  # create a .cxg_annotate virtual environment in the current directory```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
python3 -m venv .cxg_annotate  # create a .cxg_annotate virtual environment in the current directory```
```

> .cxg_annotate/bin/activate

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
source .cxg_annotate/bin/activate
```

## CELLxGENE Annotation Workflow

See our quickstart guide to  quickly see if you can run through the pipeline or check out the more detailed sections below for more detailed descriptions of the workflow. Both assume that you have properly set up a clean virtual environment to work from.

### Quickstart

In this quickstart, we will use our lung model (trained on the [Integrated Human Lung Cell atlas](https://cellxgene.cziscience.com/collections/6f6d381a-7701-4781-935c-db10d30de293)), to make annotations on a subset of another human lung dataset, [LungMap](https://cellxgene.cziscience.com/collections/625f6bf4-2f33-4942-962e-35243d284837). You can download the entire LungMap dataset [here](https://cellxgene.cziscience.com/collections/625f6bf4-2f33-4942-962e-35243d284837) Depending on your environment manager, execute one of the following quickstart commands:

#### venv
```
mkdir annotations  # create a directory to download data, run annotation pipeline and store annotated object

cd annotations  # navigate to newly created directory

wget https://cellxgene-annotation-public.s3.us-west-2.amazonaws.com/cell_type/tutorial/minilung.h5ad  # retrieve sample dataset

> cellxgene annotate -i minilung.h5ad  -m https://cellxgene-annotation-public.s3.us-west-2.amazonaws.com/cell_type/models/hlca_20220728144320_venv.zip -o minilungAnnotated.h5ad --mlflow-env-manager venv --no-use-gpu --gene-column-name feature_name  # generate annotations

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
cellxgene annotate minilung.h5ad  -m https://cellxgene-annotation-public.s3.us-west-2.amazonaws.com/cell_type/models/hlca_20220728144320_venv.zip -o minilungAnnotated.h5ad --mlflow-env-manager venv --no-use-gpu --gene-column-name feature_name  # generate annotations
```
-i option changing to positional arg in next release

> cellxgene annotate -i minilung.h5ad  -m https://cellxgene-annotation-public.s3.us-west-2.amazonaws.com/cell_type/models/hlca_20220728144320_venv.zip -o minilungAnnotated.h5ad --mlflow-env-manager venv --no-use-gpu --gene-column-name feature_name  # generate annotations

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
cellxgene annotate -i minilung.h5ad  -m https://cellxgene-annotation-public.s3.us-west-2.amazonaws.com/cell_type/models/hlca_20220728144320_venv.zip -o minilungAnnotated.h5ad --mlflow-env-manager virtualenv--no-use-gpu --gene-column-name feature_name  # generate annotations
```

Reviewer 2: or rm option entirely (this is the default value)

cellxgene launch minilungAnnotated.h5ad  # launch cellxgene explorer
```

#### conda

```
mkdir annotations  # create a directory to download data, run annotation pipeline and store annotated object

cd annotations  # navigate to newly created directory

wget https://cellxgene-annotation-public.s3.us-west-2.amazonaws.com/cell_type/tutorial/minilung.h5ad  # retrieve sample dataset

> cellxgene annotate -i minilung.h5ad  -m https://cellxgene-annotation-public.s3.us-west-2.amazonaws.com/cell_type/models/hlca_20220728144320_conda.zip -o minilungAnnotated.h5ad --mlflow-env-manager conda --no-use-gpu --gene-column-name feature_name  # generate annotations

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
cellxgene annotate minilung.h5ad  -m https://cellxgene-annotation-public.s3.us-west-2.amazonaws.com/cell_type/models/hlca_20220728144320_conda.zip -o minilungAnnotated.h5ad --mlflow-env-manager conda --no-use-gpu --gene-column-name feature_name  # generate annotations
```

#### Prediction model
You can download models to perform prediction for the following tissues:

For use in `venv` environments:
- [HLCA Lung Model](https://cellxgene-annotation-public.s3.us-west-2.amazonaws.com/cell_type/models/hlca_20220728144320_venv.zip)
- [Pan Tissue Immune Reference](https://cellxgene-annotation-public.s3.us-west-2.amazonaws.com/cell_type/models/immune_ref_20220728145305_venv.zip)

For use in `conda` environments:
- [HLCA Lung Model](https://cellxgene-annotation-public.s3.us-west-2.amazonaws.com/cell_type/models/hlca_20220728144320_conda.zip)
- [Pan Tissue Immune Reference](https://cellxgene-annotation-public.s3.us-west-2.amazonaws.com/cell_type/models/immune_ref_20220728145305_conda.zip)

### Step 1: Running `cellxgene annotate`

After installing the latest version of CELLxGENE and the annotate subcommand, you can run a standard call to the command like so (see `cellxgene annotate --help` for a full list of available options):

> `cellxgene annotate  --input-h5ad-file ./pathTo/data.h5ad --model-url modelURL --output-h5ad-file ./pathTo/annotatedData.h5ad`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`cellxgene annotate ./pathTo/data.h5ad --model-url modelURL --output-h5ad-file ./pathTo/annotatedData.h5ad`
```
